Yes, she is. We'll bring her through now.
Thank you.
Hi, Catherine.
Hi there. You
can't see me. Just a second.
Exactly.
Hi, welcome to the subcommittee, Catherine. Great to have you joining us.
Thank you very much.
We've got 10 minutes, and we'd love to have some time to ask questions.
Great. I will try to be quick.
So thank you very much for the opportunity.
Business New Zealand supports the objective of addressing modern slavery risks
and improving transparency across global supply chains.
It is a serious issue, and New Zealand businesses operating internationally
recognize both the ethical and commercial importance of
understanding and managing these risks.
Our submission is not about whether modern slavery should be addressed.
Rather, it is about ensuring the regime is proportionate, practical,
and aligned with international frameworks, so that it delivers
meaningful outcomes without creating unnecessary duplication or
unintended consequences.
One of the strongest messages we heard from members is that many businesses
likely to be captured by the bill are already reporting under
overseas modern slavery regimes, particularly Australia.
Their concern is not with transparency itself, but with the prospect of having to
undertake multiple reporting exercises for substantially the same
purpose. This is why our submission places a strong emphasis
on recognition of equivalent overseas reporting, group
reporting, and a focus on substance rather than format.
A second key theme is proportionality.
While the bill directly applies to a relatively small number of large
entities, its practical effects are likely to be extended much
further through supply chains. Many SMEs will not be
directly captured by the legislation but may nevertheless face increased
compliance expectations through supplier questionnaires,
audits, contractual requirements, and training obligations.
We therefore believe the regime should more clearly embed a
risk-based and proportionate approach to due diligence.
I think there's also,
just to quickly raise a couple of concerns or
issues.
So number one is we think we should recognize
overseas reporting as fulfilling the requirements.
We don't want to set up multiple compliance requirements
because that's duplicative and it just creates cost.
There are some differences in this bill to the Australian approach,
and I'll just highlight a couple. So incident reporting rather
than risk identification,
governance, and due diligence. That's
a harder, more extreme approach.
Enforcement and liability settings for director and officer
liabilities and potential exclusion from government
contracts. That's a really
very major thing,
particularly for big businesses, which often are doing a lot of government
work.
And the other thing that it does, which we think is probably unintended,
it captures a parent entity at section seven,
subsection two.
So that would mean the New Zealand legislation applying to global
parents that are operating under different regimes.
So that would be pretty bizarre if New Zealand modern
slavery legislation
went back up to head office somewhere overseas where they are
already participating in a different regime.
So I guess my plea would be, there's a lot in our
submission. It actually got an incredible amount of business feedback.
Would be that the drafters and the
policymakers go through it quite carefully, because what we
don't want to do is create
an expensive regime that doesn't actually
achieve what you intended it to achieve.
Thank you.
Very good. Plenty of time for questions. Members?
Greg.
You're on mute, Greg.
Apologies for that. Yeah, no, several questions.
Thank you very much for the
breadth and the detail of your submission.
Yours is I guess one of the most cautious of the
submissions that we've considered so far in terms of meaning cautious
about the proposed reporting.
Have you got misgivings around the
level being at $100 million at the moment?
I think your number is in $950. I think my numbers
were slightly more, a few dozen more than that in terms of
entities being included. Do you think that's the right number, or would you prefer
fewer to be caught?
Look, I don't think we've got an argument with that number so
much. We just want the regime to
not create high transaction costs.
So
a lot of these big companies are already reporting internationally,
so where they're doing that, we would've thought we should have mutual recognition
essentially.
Because even the slightest change in the New Zealand approach, whether
that's
year-end reporting timings differing, creates
a whole lot of cost for businesses.
It's really about
trying to make the
approachEffective, but not overly
costly. And I've put a link into our submission to
a survey that was done in the OECD about the kind of
transaction costs that a lot of ESG reporting are putting
onto businesses.
Mm.
And they can end up
spending so much on reporting that they're not investing in
what they should be investing in, in terms of
productivity, R&D,
growing the economy.
Yeah. Obviously, you're
probably aware that the reasonably recent review of Australia's
own
framework was
quite
critical of how
ineffective the author's report believed that their framework
was being. The recommendation from that, therefore, was to require
more of the framework, so to push into due
diligence.
Thoughts on that?
My understanding is that that's a whole lot more cost
to go down that route.
And I think that the thing that people need to
appreciate is that this is an international supply chain
issue. So it's
not really
focused, as our understanding, on domestic infractions
because we already have labor laws that do that.
So you're breaking the law if you do any of those things
domestically already in New Zealand, so this is really about international supply
chains.
And
it's not easy even for the biggest multinationals to
get full visibility to the end of their supply chain. They think they have it.
Often, they'll go and visit the factories and
do a whole lot of due diligence,
but then what they don't see is the cascading, the subcontracting down and
down and down
that goes on. So it's actually pretty difficult.
So,
we think that
businesses setting themselves up to
monitor and look for risk, what's...
And if you think about New Zealand, it's not hard to see where
the risk areas are. They're quite well known.
Mm.
And so
our expectation is that, particularly at the big end of town, these are
not companies that willingly or knowingly will
engage in this kind of behavior anyway.
So really, they should be doing best efforts to
try to make sure it's not in their supply chain.
But it is actually very, very difficult when you are
geographically where we are in New Zealand.
Mm.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Thanks, Catherine. Very good.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
All right, team. Next up is Dairy Workers Union.
Got Jared Phillips.
Hi, Jared. Welcome.
Can you turn your camera on, Jared?
Mute. Yep, getting there.
Hi, Jared. Welcome to the committee.
Hello.
Can you turn your camera
on?
There we go. We're on.
Yep. Fantastic. I can see Chris Flatt there with you.
Hey.
We've got 10 minutes, and we'd love to have some time-
Sure. Thanks
... love to have some time for questions.
Excellent. Thanks. We've just had a slight delay. Can you hear us okay now?
We can. Yep.
Excellent. „Tena koutou katoa.“ Chris Flatt „taku ingoa.“ Thank you
again to you, Philly, to all of the members of the committee.
The DWU represents, as you may know, approximately 9,000 workers
in the dairy manufacturing industry in Aotearoa and covers 90% of
workers in that industry. Today, I want to outline why the DWU
supports this bill, and then move on to why the DWU supports
recommendations to strengthen the bill.
There's two key points before I hand over to Jared Phillips.
I'm the national secretary, been involved in the submission, but I also want to
acknowledge and hand over to Jared Phillips, our general counsel, shortly to
elaborate on our submissions that we've provided.
The two key points that we want to highlight today is that the DWU support
for the Modern Slavery Bill is in the context of a long history
of advocacy against forced labor and in favor of international
labor, trade union, and human rights.
Second, the DWU views the bill as a significant step in the
right direction and seeks that the bill goes further, especially by
including mandatory due diligence, a lower reporting entity
threshold, and stronger support for victims.
I'll hand over to Jared to outline the other points and then, as you said, we'll
try and have some time for questions, because that's the crucial piece of this
process. Thanks very much.
„Tena koutou katoa,“ everybody. The DWU written submissions
state that on the information of recognized certifications provided
by dairy industry employers and peak bodies, and in industry
agreements, the DWU currently understands that there are no modern slavery or
forced labor conditions in the industry covered by the DWU or in the
Aotearoa New Zealand on-farm sector.
The DWU also has an international agreement with our major dairy co-op,
Fonterra, asserting commitments against forced labor internationally,
including in subsidiaries and joint ventures.
Whilst acknowledging that, the DWU also believes that there must be vigilance
against the
potential for any creep of forced labor commands, and the
DWU supports measures that expose and help overcome forced labor in
all sectors also, hence the importance of this bill.
We have a formal policy on worker internationalism and
international affiliations, and this provides that the DWU
supports contacts and relationships with international
organizations and encourages the formation and extension to
international work as provided at DWU
AGMs.Our principal international work is with the International
Union of Food Workers, the IUF. In February 2026, the
IUF has reinforced that the broader agricultural sector remains the world's largest
employment sector and is characterized by persistent decent
work deficits, including poverty, inequality, poor health and safety
conditions, and the highest incidents of child and forced labor.
So this is very much of interest, and this bill
is very much of interest and is supported by us.
The DW's policy is that it will assist and work with the IUF to help any
fraternal organizational workers in general employed by
companies owned or part-owned by Aotearoa New Zealand dairy industry or
subsidiaries or IUF affiliates in the furtherance of trade union
and human rights. It's important that this policy is not only for the
furtherance of trade union rights, although that is crucially important, but also
for the furtherance of workers' rights as human rights.
The DW has also developed Trans-Tasman and South America trade union links
in furtherance of these objectives.
I want to talk about the agreement that we have with Fonterra.
On the issue of workers' internationalism, the DW draws attention to a
significant agreement that was agreed in 2002 and
remains in place. This was an agreement between Fonterra, the International
Union of Food Workers, and the DW. It was signed by Fonterra's then
CEO, the General Secretary of the IUF, the DW General
Secretary, Ray Potros, and it was witnessed by the Director General
of the International Labor Organization and Prime Minister of Aotearoa
New Zealand, Helen Clark. Amongst other things, this
agreement demonstrates all parties' international commitments to International
Labor Organization standards, including the Forced Labor Convention of
1930, the Abolition of Forced Labor Convention
1957, and the Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention
1999. This agreement covers subsidiaries and
joint ventures.
I want to move now onto the support that we have for the
CTU recommendations to strengthen the bill.
We support all of the CTU's eight recommendations.
We do draw particular attention to recommendation one, that
the reporting requirements should be strengthened so that entities must
undertake due diligence on modern slavery and not just
complete transparency reporting.
We also wish to highlight recommendation three, that the revenue
threshold for reporting entities is set at 50 million per
annum instead of 100 million per annum, and
recommendation eight, to increase support for victims of modern
slavery in Aotearoa New Zealand and supply chains.
The reason we draw particular attention
to these recommendations is that these are the areas of improvement that we believe
will drive the most material change for the broader number of affected
people. Just pass over to Chris if you want to add anything to that.
So look, I know most importantly we'll open up for questions, but look, it's
really great to see this work and we want to commend both Camilla Belich and Greg
Fleming for the work across a number of parties in terms of bringing this
bill. It is great to have a bill, to be honest, that improves workers'
lives, unlike a series of laws that we've had by the coalition government
where we've been selecting where rights are being taken away.
And just going to also highlight again that those international
agreements are very, very important, because they provide, in
many ways, another pair of eyes and audit trail.
And I know that a number of our employers have used those
networks across the supply chains, because one of the key issues in
supply chains is line of sight to see where modern
slavery is engaging. And this international reach that we have with the IUF
and other international peak bodies gives us an ability to test and
verify a number of the commercial third-party audit
trails that are undertaken in modern slavery assessment by
organizations. Want to highlight the importance of that work.
I'll pause there now for any questions or areas you'd like us to go into more
detail.
Okay. Thanks, guys. Members, any questions?
Hmm.
Sure, Greg.
Tena koutou. Thank you for your both your written and your oral submission.
Just go back about five or six minutes ago, you were talking about
international incidents in which you were talking about giving a clear,
examples of exploitation. I just missed where that was
and who was involved.
We have had a number of
discussions through particularly Southeast Asia in terms of supply
chain arrangements into dairy processing industries.
We haven't had specific examples.
What
Jared's referring to is that we are able to often
verify supply arrangements or contracting arrangements with
third parties who may be providing
either supplies or labor into
direct company relationships or contractors that are engaging.
And so we haven't had direct relationships or direct incidences that
we've pointed to, but we've often been able to verify reports that have
occurred from third party audit
investigations, and it gives us an ability to verify that on the
ground what contract firms are being used, for example.
Okay. Gotcha. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
I've got a question, Chris, Jared.
If we go down this track, as
I certainly hope we do, and strengthen the bill, it
does take us into some, for the country, it takes us into some quite
interesting territory if you think about the trade agreement that
we, New Zealanders, signed with the United Arab Emirates
and also the trade agreement with India, two countries
that have particularly large, well-documented,
examples of forced labor, servitude, and indenture.
Any thoughts on that from an international trade perspective?
Yeah.
From our point of view, the figures are that there are
around about
million people still engaged in the
slave and bonded labor sorts of conditions, and that those are in those
countries. And we
think that the compliance should be upon those New Zealand
companies that are operating to ensure their compliance, and that is part of
the cost of doing business.
Mm.
I think this is going to be one, and this is why this bill is so important,
and the analysis and why we've suggested the recommendations
across the reporting entities, because there is so much
interaction in our industry into a number of overseas
countries that will need quite detailed analysis across
supply chains. And it doesn't really matter just because you're at 100 million
or so of revenue. The interaction of the number of companies in New
Zealand at a lower threshold will mean that it's critical that the
analysis takes place, and that's why I come back to our discussion around the
importance of international bodies such as the IOF to assist in that
because we see the amount of work that that has involved, and it's going to be a
large amount of undertaking. So I don't think we can add
much further in terms of relation to those trade deals, but we just acknowledge
this is a piece that we're seeing in the private sector as taking a huge amount of
work.
I think one thing further that we would add as one of the other
submissions of the CTU recommendations is about the
involvement of trade unions in the-
Mm
... we are relevant in the
assessment, and we think that that's a very relevant point, and we'd like to
highlight that as well. But it also goes to show the role that
trade unions have and that we have demonstrated in
not only relying on legislation, but
on its own proactive stance in terms of the relationships that it builds
internationally,
to prevent local employers from
using standards that are below
what's acceptable.
Thanks, guys. Really appreciate your input.
Thank you.
Okay. All right, committee. Next up is Ben
Taylor.
Welcome, Ben.
Do you want to turn your camera on?
Yes. There we are.
Hello.
Welcome to the subcommittee. Ben, you've got five minutes, and we'd love to have
some time at the end for questions.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you. I support the Modern Slavery Bill, and urge the
committee to recommend to the House that the bill is passed, but with some minor
changes. The changes I'm suggesting to the bill
will make producing a modern slavery statement for entities more efficient and
practical.
My first suggestion is amending the reporting period in the Modern
Slavery Bill to align with entities' accounting period.
The current wording in Section 6 defines a reporting period for a government
agency as ending on 30 June and for any other entity on 31
March. There's many non-government entities that have an
accounting period that ends on a different month than March.
Not having an entity's period for a modern slavery statement align with your
accounting period is likely to cause some frustration.
If an entity's modern slavery reporting period doesn't align with their accounting
period, it will likely increase the internal governance and reporting
burden more than if they're aligned.
And this is because most entities have structured internal governance processes in
place that align with the accounting period.
So aligning modern slavery statements would help them bed that process into the
existing governance. Also, aligning the periods for entities would make
it more likely that modern slavery statements would be published by an entity at
the same time as their other financial information, which would be
good for readers and users to have all that information available
together. My second suggestion is allowing modern
slavery statements to be incorporated into entities' existing
public reporting. The bill doesn't explicitly state a modern slavery statement
can't be incorporated into entities' other public reporting,
i.e. annual reports.
I would like it to be made clear that modern slavery statements can be included
into other public reports that entities produce.
And modern slavery statements don't have to be a standalone document, although they
can be if an entity wants it.
That would be helpful for many entities that are already producing integrated
reporting, as that aims to contain all relevant information for readers in a
single document rather than having lots of standalone documents.
And lastly, it's around commencement of producing a modern slavery statement for an
entity. The bill, as it currently states, comes into
force six months after royal assent,
then entities that meet the revenue threshold will have to produce a modern slavery
statement, which is reasonably quick for a new disclosure regime.
I suggest adding an additional clause that entities have to produce a modern
slavery statement for the following reporting period once they have
recorded revenue of more than $100 million at their
balance date. This means it will give entities a little bit more time to establish
the governance and data collection that is needed before they have to produce their
first statement.
This will also be helpful for when the legislation is in place for entities that
currently sit just below the revenue threshold, as they won't know what their
exact revenue will be for the coming financial year,
and this would mean if they tip over that threshold, they'd have to produce a
modern slavery statement for the following
reporting period,
and not get killed out. So, those are my suggestions. Thank you.
Thanks, Ben. Very practical and detailed proposals.
Just out of interest, Ben, what's your background and interest in this issue?
I am a sustainability lead and I've been working in ESG advisory, and
I've-produced mandatory or participated in
producing mandatory climate disclosures.
Okay.
So kind of gone through internal governance and processes.
And that's probably where some of my learnings are coming from this
is-
Sure
... just to try and make that as easy-
Yeah
... as possible.
Yeah. Great. Okay. Looks like Greg's got a question for you.
Yeah, I do. Hey, there, just echoing Phil's comment, Ben.
This is incredibly helpful and practical insight.
Just two quick questions for you. One, around on your first suggestion in terms of
the alignment, do you see any problem with allowing
companies to choose
whichever 12-month period they want to align with?
Because, or do you, yeah, in terms of so not having a standard reporting
period across all companies, just that
a couple of companies that are reporting under the Australian
regime have asked that they be allowed to, even though their
financial year in New Zealand is obviously to March 31, they've asked if it
could be
possible for them to report to June 30, even though they're not a government
agency, so as to align with the reporting requirements in Australia.
Do you see any problems with
there being a range of dates used by different companies?
Yeah. My preference would only be have one, and it's aligning it to their
accounting period.
Right.
I've got a
kind of financial background, but again, it
helps capture if there's any modern slavery
events in that reporting period, there could be a
financial impact, and it kind of captures that snapshot, and it
aligns all other types of reporting that entities do, generally
aligns to the accounting period. So I would
have it for the entities caught under the New Zealand regime reporting for their
accounting period. That keeps it nice and simple.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right. Time's up. Thanks, Ben. Appreciate it.
Okay. We've got next, we have, I think
Larissa from Fair Supply Analytics. Or is that Kim?
Kim.
Oh, Kim. Yep, I see, yep. Mixing up my agenda
items. Hi, Kim. Welcome to the subcommittee.
Thank you very much. Kim Randall. I'm the CEO and
co-founder of Fair Supply. Fair Supply is a
software and consulting firm that provides organizations
with supply chain visibility and quantifies modern
slavery risk along those supply chains.
Over the last seven years, we've worked closely with hundreds of
Australian reporting entities where we have
both advised on supply chain risk of modern
slavery, undertaken
due diligence on their behalf, and drafted modern slavery statements
in Australia.
Fair Supply supports the bill.
We have three recommendations in relation
to the actual operation of the bill for the committee's
consideration. The first is the alignment of reporting
periods to the financial year.
I agree with the last, with
Ben's comments. You've just heard them quite extensively,
so I will just say I agree with them.
But also for reporting entities who are reporting in multiple
jurisdictions, a lot of
modern slavery risk in the supply chain is actually based on
spend data during that financial period.
And so to
increase the burden on data collection, to have misaligned
reporting
periods would probably place an unnecessary burden on
businesses who are looking at risk in their
supply chains.
I also wanted to speak to the inadvertent
effect and pressure that mandatory due diligence, while
I support mandatory due diligence places on non-reporting
entities. So often what happens when
companies are undertaking due diligence is they
send supplier self-assessment questionnaires to
those companies which may not be a reporting entity.
So they say, "The way in which we're going to engage with our suppliers to
assess their modern slavery risk is we're going to send them a
questionnaire and ask them if they are identifying,
assessing, and addressing modern slavery risk, regardless of whether they have
legal obligation to do so." This results in
a lot of different questionnaires being sent to SMEs.
And in circumstances where that is not accompanied
by appropriate education,
training, and a streamlined approach, what often happens
is SMEs either lose their social license
to operate with the reporting entities because they're worried about keeping the
lights on, not about incorporating modern
slavery governance issues, or
they're scared that this is some kind of investigation.
They're not actually aware of the reporting obligations that the reporting
entities have.
And they are just like, "Well, does this mean we're going to
lose our contract with the big reporting entity?" And so where we've
seen this issue being effectively addressed and
company reporting entities meaningfully engaged to
actually undertake due diligence is where the due
diligence is accompanied by free
education and training for SMEs, and the SMEs
have a streamlined approach to, or a proportional approach,
to essentially addressing modern slavery risk
in a way that is proportional to the size and sophistication
of their organization. You'll see in my recommendation
that I have proposed free education and training
provided by the government to SMEs, and
also a repository whereby SMEs
cancommunicate what they're doing to address modern
slavery, that the reporting entities have visibility over, so
the need for repetitive and constant engagement
by different suppliers
is overcome.
Cool. Thank you, Kim. We've used the available time, but those
are well-made and very clear and practical points, so thank you.
Thank you very much.
Cheers.
Okay, now we're looking at
the next submitter is the Business and Professional Women of New Zealand,
and I think
Lara is joining us. Hi, Lara. Welcome.
Hello. Thanks for having me.
You are very welcome. Lara, you've got five minutes, and we'd love to have a minute
or so to ask questions if you choose to do that.
Okay. I'll be as quick as I can.
Sure.
I was born as a Jehovah's Witness child, and I've been a whistleblower
regarding their unlawful behavior, non-compliance,
and abuses for almost a decade. Before I retired, I was
also a procurement professional.
I allege that the Jehovah's Witnesses perpetrate modern slavery against an
estimated 1,629 current
New Zealand children.
In New Zealand, the Jehovah's Witnesses are governed
by the Australian head office, and in turn, they report to the governing body
in the US.
I say modern slavery has occurred in various ways.
One, forced marriage, two, human trafficking, and
three, child forced labor. And I say that the child forced
labor includes babysitting or child minding,
cleaning according to a roster, gardening, also on a
roster system, general construction labor, such as helping to
build Kingdom Halls.
Five, selling literature from door to door, also called witnessing, with
monthly performance metrics and quotas.
Six, recruiting, also known as witnessing, and training
in all of the above-mentioned labor.
In June 2019, I first contacted the
ILO, the International Labour Organization, to raise
allegations of modern slavery.
In October 2022, at the anniversary of the Australian
National Apology
to Victims and Survivors of Institutional Child Sexual Abuse,
the Honorable Tony Zappia, MP, said of the Jehovah's
Witnesses, "They call their churches Kingdom Halls, and they are built
using congregants' labor and donations.
The labor is unpaid and, as I understand, at times
includes the labor of children.
They derive money from deceased estates bequeathed to the Watchtower
Bible and Tract Society by convening district
conventions and circuit assemblies and through the sale of real estate,
which appears to have escalated since the Royal Commission
in Australia and inquiries into their organizations in
other countries. Their wealth is estimated
in billions, not millions, of dollars."
In November 2023, I made a
submission to the Australian review of the Modern Slavery
Act 2018 in New South Wales,
Australia. Subsequently, several other Jehovah's Witness
survivors made their own allegations to the
Office of the New South Wales Anti-Slavery Commissioner.
In March 2024, over 5% of written submissions
to the UK's House of Lords Modern Slavery Act
2015 related to the Jehovah's Witnesses,
and those that submitted included people representing five
countries. The final report included
suggestions that current definitions be expanded to apply
to cult coercion.
This echoes what was said earlier today.
In November 2024, I met with the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery to discuss
this.
And then in May 2025, last year, the inquiry
into the recruitment methods and impacts of cults and organized
fringe groups was established in Victoria, Australia.
Earlier, it was made reference to coercive control.
I detailed this in a submission, and I'm happy to provide it to you if you wish.
In April of this year, Survivor Connections published an information
session entitled "Understanding Modern
Slavery in Cult High Control Group Contexts."
And then the Office of the New South Wales Anti-Slavery Commissioner
held a forum workshop
on modern slavery high control groups, and the
University of Wollongong released research on understanding the
relationships between trafficking, slavery, and
slavery-like practices within high control groups in
Australia.
Closer to you in New Zealand, within the Royal Commission into
Abuse in Care, the judgment,
a judicial review stated there was nothing inherently
objectionable in the Commission examining in practices within the faith,
such as disfellowshipping and shunning, which carry
obvious potential for manipulation, coercion, and psychological
harm.
Thank you. I have recommendations, but I'll take your questions.
All right. Thank you, Lara. Members, any questions?
Yeah, just one, if it's okay.
Yeah, sure, Chris.
Yes.
Just, yeah, thank you for your submission.
Just the scope of this bill is primarily about
reporting on supplier chains,
internationally and domestically.
The fact you're submitting on this indicates that in your experience and view, you
don't believe that there are-Sufficient
channels,
oversight or enforcement in New Zealand to deal with the issues that you've
identified. Is that correct?
Only with the modern slavery part that I'm bringing to your attention.
That's all I wish to bring to your attention-
Okay
... within the context of
unlawful activities.
Okay, so what you're specifically asking for then is in the context of this bill,
is for the definition of modern slavery to be
sufficient to cover the incidences that you're
describing?
Maybe I'll go forward to my recommendations, that might help.
I've got four here.
So you're right, the Jehovah's Witnesses are not part of supply chains in the
Antipodes. They are in other countries.
In any event, their $100 million proposed threshold wouldn't
flag them. So I recommend that all religious organizations in New
Zealand be part of the reporting as they are high risk.
And the question to ask yourself is, do you want New Zealand children
or New Zealanders to not be part of modern slavery?
Or are you more interested in reporting on modern slavery coming
from other countries?
That's my first recommendation. The second recommendation is,
from the experience we've had with New South Wales and now nationally,
we agree that your Anti-Slavery Commissioner needs investigative
powers.
And I can also recommend that the Survivor Focused
Lived Experience Engagement Program, also called LEAP, of which I
was a part,
is run in Australia, and I recommend that you have something like that.
That has helped to elucidate these issues.
However, we see a potential conflict of interest if religious
organizations work with these cohorts
of slavery survivors.
Hmm.
Does that help answer your question?
Yeah, that's very good. Thank you very much, Lara.
Thank you.
Thank you, Lara. Very interesting, very good.
Appreciate your submission.
Have a good day.
You too.
Thank you.
Okay, committee, we now have Business and Professional Women of
New Zealand, Teresa Mee. Welcome, Teresa, to the subcommittee.
Tena koutou. Just wanted to clarify that the previous speaker wasn't-
Yes
... speaking on behalf of BPW New Zealand.
My mistake, sorry. Yeah.
That's all good. So thank you-
Teresa, have you got your camera on so we can see you?
Does that work now?
Excellent. Well, Teresa, you've got 10 minutes, and we'd love to have a minute or
two to ask questions.
Awesome. So yes, my name's Teresa Mee, and I'm speaking on
behalf of the New Zealand Federation of Business and Professional Women,
where I chair the Issues Task Force.
And BPW New Zealand is an all-volunteer,
nonpartisan organization with members throughout Aotearoa.
We're a grassroots organization, and we develop our policy
positions at our AGMs where they're debated, and these are what
guide our national advocacy work.
We're also part of a global network through BPW International,
which has affiliates in over 100 countries and holds
general consultative status at the United Nations Economic and Social
Council.
So at our core, our purpose is to work to advance the
status of women, to promote equal opportunity, and to
remove discrimination in all areas of economic, civil, and
political life, and that's why we're submitting on this bill.
So modern slavery sits directly within our longstanding focus on
working conditions, economic security, and the prevention of
exploitation and violence against women and girls.
At our 2023 AGM,
BPW New Zealand members passed a national resolution calling for
modern slavery legislation in New Zealand, and that
resolution urged the introduction of a requirement for all
businesses operating in New Zealand to take action to
prevent and address exploitation in supply chains and
workplaces,
with the level of action or reporting requirements graduated to
reflect the size and the resources of each business.
So we strongly support the introduction of this bill, and we're very
pleased to see the cross-party collaboration that allowed this bill to
progress.
But just as importantly, we see this as the beginning of a process and
not the end of it.
From our perspective, modern slavery is fundamentally about
inequality, and it is not gender neutral.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected by modern slavery,
particularly in forms such as forced marriage, domestic
servitude, and sexual exploitation.
And these are precisely the kind of issues that we have worked on for decades:
economic vulnerability, unequal power relationships,
and barriers to speaking up or accessing justice.
As we've stated in our submission, we support the reporting
framework of this bill.
It will increase transparency, and it'll create a level of
accountability that is currently missing.
From our members' perspective, one of the drivers behind our support for
modern slavery legislation is the ability to make informed choices
about where we spend our money based on how businesses
identify and address risks in their supply chains.
It enables individuals to align their purchasing decisions with their
values.
However, transparency alone does not necessarily
lead to change, and there is a real risk that entities will
treat compliance with this legislation as a box-ticking
exercise.
We think change requires ongoing scrutiny,
coordination, and a clear focus on outcomes over
time.And so we've set out a number of
recommendations in our submission,
but our key message today is the importance of independent
oversight and leadership. And we
consider that the establishment of an independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner
would significantly strengthen this regime.
An independent commissioner could monitor how the legislation is working in
practice, identify gaps, ensure that there is a focus on
improving the framework for modern slavery reporting, and action
over time.
And this addition is, we consider, the most
important change that the committee can recommend, as it ensures there is
dedicated attention on how the legislation is actually working in practice,
and to consider the steps that are required to achieve further
progress.
Given the disproportionate impact of modern slavery on women and girls, we
would also recommend that the Anti-Slavery Commissioner's mandate includes
applying a gendered lens when reviewing the effectiveness of
the legislation and considering what steps are needed to improve it.
As we've noted in our submission, international experience suggests that
reporting frameworks are often only a first step,
and that over time there is a need to move towards clearer
expectations that organizations actively identify and
reduce risks. But we recognize how important it is to make
a start,
particularly as Aotearoa has been lagging behind the countries which
we compare ourselves to, by not having any modern slavery
legislation in place.
So, in conclusion, this bill
we consider to be a really important step, and we support it.
But we consider that the inclusion of independent oversight is
critical to ensuring that the framework remains effective over time.
We'd welcome the committee's views on how that oversight can best be embedded
in the framework. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Thank you, Teresa. Questions? Greg.
Yeah, thank you very much, Teresa.
Hey, when you talk about an independent commissioner-
Mm-hmm
... would you consider that an assistant commissioner
working within the HRC or the Human Rights Commission, with the
specific delegation of this portfolio, sufficient?
Yes. The EEO
role within that framework has worked well in the past.
So that,
I think, would work within that
framework. Yes.
Okay.
I'm happy with that.
And when you say independent commissioner-
Independent
... that would meet that?
Well, yeah, in terms of having the mandate to-
Yeah
... there are a number of commissioners within that framework who
have shown over time that they can independently review
what the government is doing and provide
critical
recommendations about how to improve-
Great
... what the government is doing.
And do you think that the scope of this kind of responsibility is such
that it should be their sole delegation?
Or could you imagine that they could hold that along with another
delegation?
We would prefer that it would be their sole delegation.
I was listening to a previous submitter talking about education and
training, and I think that's something that could fall neatly within
that portfolio as well, and they could focus on making sure that there
is enough
resources available for
businesses, including non-reporting entities, to
be able to provide the information that's needed for the reporting and
for the reporters.
Okay. And within the work that you guys do with
international counterparts, are there any
regimes or
arrangements in terms of commissioners that you think that we should look at, that
you think are good examples of the
specific emphases that you were detailing in your submission just
now?
I probably can't point to a specific regime.
I'm aware that in Europe they're
sort of moving on from the initial just reporting framework to-
Mm
... there being a more active
requirement on businesses. But,
no, I'm-
Okay
...
not able to give that detail.
Can I just say, Teresa, if you do, in the next few days, if you're in contact
with the international counterparts and you do identify any,
particularly any commissioners that-
Right
... have, because the only commissioner that I'm aware that was talked specifically
to is the Australian, New South Wales-
Australian, yeah
... Commissioner. It'd be really helpful if there's someone within your wider
international networks that we could
speak to, who'd be another example of how that
commissioner's role is carried out.
Yep.
And what was
considered when they were recruited as well, and then their learnings from there.
That'd be really helpful.
No, that's great feedback. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Teresa.
Excellent. Thanks very much for your submission, Teresa.
Yeah, no questions. Thank you. Okay.
Bye.
All right, committee.
Freightways are not joining us,
but we are next being joined by Ananish Chowdhury.
Also, just to note, the BPW submission,
there was no active link to the substantive submission.
That's been rectified and it's now in the agenda, so.
Ananish, welcome to the subcommittee,
looking at the Modern Slavery Bill.
Ananish, can you join us with your camera
on?Hi,
Ananish. Welcome to the committee. You've got five minutes.
We'd love to have a chance to ask you one or two questions within that time.
Over to you.
Thank you very much.
Good morning. My name is Ananish Chaudhuri.
I'm Professor of Experimental Economics at the University of Auckland.
I'm currently a member of the Regulatory Standards Board.
It is my understanding that this bill, having been introduced to the House
before July 1, 2026, will not come to the
RSB.
In any event, my submission is based on public writing that appeared
long before my appointment. This is a matter of public record, so
if the bill did come to the RSB, then the matter of conflict of interest
will be dealt with appropriately at the time.
I didn't know who was going to be on the committee.
I should point out that Greg Fleming is my
MP.
Yeah.
I wish to make three points and I'm sorry,
Greg, but I will be speaking
in opposition to this bill.
Yeah.
I wish to make three points. I'm not sure if I'll have time
left over since I only have five minutes.
The first problem with this bill is the virtual impossibility of this
task.
See, modern supply chains are complex and transnational.
You probably understand that. Identifying the presence of forced
labor in some part of that supply chain is virtually impossible
for the following reasons. So here, this is my
Nike sneaker.
This Nike sneaker, this is designed in Oregon,
USA.
The polyester yarn is made in Taiwan, the knit upper
part in China, the EVA foam is produced in Vietnam,
the air unit is manufactured in the United States,
shoelace is produced in China, and final assembly is
completed in Vietnam.
Many of these contractors will have subcontractors.
If a company really wants to address absence of forced
labor in any part of the supply chain, then the compliance
cost would be massive.
So the most likely outcome is this: companies will simply say,
"No, we do not use slave labor," and if found guilty of
violating this promise, they'll pay a fine or possibly
negotiate a settlement.
The second big problem with a bill like this is the
problems in defining modern slavery.
There are multiple different definitions of modern slavery from bodies
such as the UN's International Labour Organization.
Some practices are clearly illegal, and most countries have laws
to deal with those.
Some other issues or systems are less clear-cut.
In my submission, for instance, I drew attention to the Kafala
system in the Middle East.
A similar argument will be true for people who work as
domestic servants in many developing nations.
All these arrangements qualify as forced labor under your
definition.
The question is, why do people willingly sign up for these
jobs? And the reason they do so is because
the alternatives are often far worse.
Third, and most importantly, laws such as
these often end up exacerbating the
very problem they seek to solve.
As the former World Bank chief economist, Kaushik Basu,
points out, this is an area where prescription
has outstripped analysis by a wide margin.
So let's take the example of child labor, which is very much a part
of modern slavery or forced labor.
Economists have actually collected a lot of evidence in this
area.
What we find is that laws aimed at curbing child
labor generally result in higher child labor,
and the intuition is not hard to understand.
See, no parent wants children to work.
Children only work when a family is unable to earn
enough for subsistence.
If and when international trade agreements prevent children from
working in Bangladeshi garment factories, for instance, the
children of the needy don't stop working.
They go on to much more precarious work and a much more
precarious existence.
A recent peer-reviewed paper looks at the impact of regional
trade agreements on child labor.
They find that trade agreements that include provisions
banning child labor actually increase child labor both
for young children, 14 to 17-year-olds, and especially
14 to 17-year-olds, and there is a corresponding
decrease in school enrollment for those age groups.
Think about this for a minute. Many of you on the committee will agree with the
proposition
that banning begging doesn't stop begging,
because the ban does not address the root cause.
So if a ban does not work for begging, then it's not clear
why banning modern slavery will stop modern slavery.
You haven't addressed the root cause of modern slavery, which is
typically poverty.
So there are certainly ways of reducing child labor in these affected
countries, such as mandating and enforcing minimum wage laws
or subsidizing schooling, but trading partners passing laws like this does not
help.
I think I'm out of time.
Thank you, Ananish. That's
a very different perspective than the other ones that we've heard, but I think it's
very valuable, and I want to thank you for your submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you for having me.
Yep.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Very good.
Thank you.
All right, members, next up is the Institute
of Directors
joining us.
Mr. Chair, we might actually need the committee to suspend for
a short break-
Okay
... while we look at
procuring your next submitter.
Okay. So do you want to break until 11:30?
That would be great.
Okay.
Done.
See you shortly, team